THE UP SYSTEM AND THE UP MANILA MISSION
The University of the Philippines (UP) is declared by law as the National University. As stated in the UP Charter of 2008 (Mandate as the National University, Republic Act 9500), the University has the responsibility of performing a unique and distinctive leadership role in higher education and development as:
a graduate university,
a research university,
a public service university, and
a regional and global university
In view thereof, UP Manila shall continually strive to become globally competitive and nationally relevant, while upholding its tradition of academic and research excellence. It shall push for academic and operational excellence through innovative research work, enriched curricula, and dependable public service. It shall endeavor to maintain efﬁcient administrative governance and promote creative means to gain ﬁnancial sustainability while retaining government support. Its mission is to become an entrepreneurial research university, with relevant published researches that are translated to policies and applications that will beneﬁt the Filipino people.
FUNCTIONS OF THE NGOHS
As approved during the Board of Regents' 1171st meeting on May 20, 2003, the National Graduate School for the Health Sciences (NGSHS) was renamed the National Graduate Ofﬁce for the Health Sciences (NGOHS). The NGOHS, in consonance with the goal of UP Manila and in coordination with the different degree-granting units (DGUs), shall strive to:
develop new academic courses/programs and enhance existing ones;
promote and ensure regular evaluation of graduate programs by proper persons or units to ascertain adherence to University standards;
formulate policies and guidelines for the administration of graduate programs in consultation with the DGUs;
enforce all graduate program policies and procedures of DGUs;
coordinate with pertinent ofﬁces to address issues on graduate program offerings;
serve as the information center on graduate programs and initiatives; and
endorse the program of expenditures submitted by the individual DGUs through the Graduate Tuition Fund (GTF) Utilization Plan.

THE GRADUATE FACULTY
The graduate faculties of the University of the Philippines Manila are qualiﬁed faculty members with equal rights and privileges in the formulation and implementation of guidelines, rules, standards, and policies pertaining to graduate programs. They have administrative jurisdiction over all graduate programs offered by their respective DGUs and recommendatory functions to the Board of Regents, through the NGOHS and the University Council, as regards the institution, revisions, or abolition of graduate courses and programs. The graduate faculty also have administrative jurisdiction over the admission and graduation of their students in close coordination with the NGOHS. It can act on particular issues and problems concerning graduate programs and graduate students that may be raised through the DGUs, NGOHS, or the Graduate Management Team (GMT).
Section 1. Composition And Membership
Article 1. Recommendation for appointment to the graduate faculty is initiated by the Department Chairman, and endorsed by the Academic Graduate Program Committee (AGPC) to the Dean of the academic unit and to the NGOHS Director who, in turn, recommends approval to the Chancellor, as regular, adjunct, or afﬁliate graduate faculty.
For adjunct and afﬁliate graduate faculty, the appointment is temporary in nature, lasting for a maximum period of one year. The appointment is automatically terminated at the end of the stated academic year unless renewed. Permanent appointments may be issued to qualiﬁed regular faculty upon recommendation of the Dean of the college.
Article 2. Appointment as regular member of the graduate faculty shall be made on the basis of the following criteria:
He/she must have a graduate degree (MS or PhD or equivalents), except in very meritorious cases, as in the following:
Faculty with appropriate expertise both in applied and practical experiences with a rank of at least Assistant Professor;
Faculty with good research and publication records and with known expertise in the ﬁeld; and
Faculty recognized by peer/s and professional organization/s as an expert
In such meritorious cases, this policy shall be waived upon recommendation of the Dean of the academic unit and the NGOHS Director, in consultation with the appropriate graduate committee and with the approval of the Chancellor.
He/she must have handled at least a graduate course for two semesters.

Article 3. Appointment as an adjunct member of the graduate faculty shall be given to a recognized expert in a particular ﬁeld from another institution.
Article 4. Appointment as afﬁliate members shall be given to professorial lecturers, professors emeritus, visiting professors, exchange professors, retired UP faculty, and staff members within UP Manila and other constituent units of the University.
Article 5. Graduate faculty shall lose regular membership if they cease to participate actively in graduate education at UP Manila. Active participation in graduate education means satisfaction of at least one of the following conditions:
Teaching at least one (1) graduate course; and/or
Membership in any graduate academic committee of their academic unit.
Article 6. Members of the graduate faculty who have lost their regular membership may be reinstated following the provisions stated in Section 1 Article 1.
THE GRADUATE MANAGEMENT TEAM
Section 1. Composition and Functions
Article 1. The Graduate Management Team (GMT) shall be comprised of Graduate Program Coordinators (GPCs) as designated by their respective college Deans and the Coordinator of Continuing Education. The NGOHS Director shall serve as the Chair of the GMT.
Article 2. The GMT shall serve as liaison ofﬁcers between the NGOHS and the DGUs. They shall:
prepare their individual unit's program of expenditures (in the form of GTF Utilization Plan) in consultation with the different departments within their college;
provide a venue for the discussion of policies and guidelines governing the administration of their graduate programs; and
coordinate with the NGOHS on the creation, review, and evaluation of existing graduate degree programs and development of new ones in terms of course objectives and contents, instructional design and materials, methods of instruction and academic requirements.



THE GRADUATE MANAGEMENT TEAM


OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR
Section 1. Appointment As Executive Ofﬁcer Of The NGOHS
The Director is appointed by the Chancellor to serve as the Executive Ofﬁcer of the NGOHS.
Section 2. Term Of Ofﬁce
The term of ofﬁce of the Director is co-terminus with the Chancellor of the University.
Section 3. Functions Of The Director
The Director shall have the following functions:
preside over the meetings of the GMT;
facilitate the review and evaluation of existing graduate degree programs and develop new ones in terms of course objectives and contents, instructional design and materials, methods of instruction and academic requirements;
recommend to the Board of Regents (BOR), after consultation with the different DGUs and their graduate program committees, through proper university channels, the following cases: creation, revision, or abolition of graduate courses and programs; admission, retention, and graduation criteria and requirements; student welfare projects; tuition and other fees; and
administer, coordinate, and implement graduate education decisions, policies and guidelines approved by the graduate faculty, the University Council, and/or the BOR affecting NGOHS operations and programs in UP Manila.
In particular, the Director:
reviews policies in the implementation of the various graduate programs and approves admission, readmission, or disqualiﬁcation of students from the graduate program, upon recommendation of the Academic Graduate Program Committees (AGPCs), based on existing codal provisions;
authorizes graduate degree holders who are not regular or associate/afﬁliate faculty to teach graduate courses, or become members of special projects or thesis, dissertation, or examining panels, and endorses other exceptionally meritorious cases, upon the recommendation of the Dean of the DGUs and the AGPCs;
approves the composition of and gives appointments to panel members for theses, dissertations, and/or qualifying examinations;
signs and accepts bound copies of special projects or theses, and dissertations upon the acceptance and recommendation of adviser, Academic Graduate Program Committee Chair (AGPCC) and the college Dean;
presents before the graduate faculty of the DGU all unresolved issues and problems concerning graduate programs and students;
conducts periodic orientation of new graduate students;

helps facilitate linkages and memoranda of agreement (MOAs) with local and international institutions for faculty development, resource sharing, and or generation;
institutes guidelines for record-keeping, information management systems, and other administrative operations;
helps in initiating marketing strategies, such as publishing of graduate programs in local newspapers, updating of graduate school catalogues, program brochures, and other marketing materials; and
prepares and submits periodic and annual reports on graduate program operations, updates, and relevant activities to the Chancellor and other authorities of the University.
THE GRADUATE PROGRAM AND ADMISSIONS COMMITTEES
Section 1. The Academic Graduate Program Committee
Each college or DGU shall have an Academic Graduate Program Committee (AGPC) consisting of recommended graduate faculty from different departments and appointed by the respective academic Dean. When a DGU has an interdisciplinary program, the Dean shall appoint the members and Chair of the Interdisciplinary Program Committee (IPC) that will oversee the supervision and implementation of the program. The Dean likewise appoints a Graduate Program Coordinator (GPC).
Section 2. The Graduate Program Coordinator
The GPC shall become the college representative to the Graduate Management Team (GMT) of the University and shall be responsible for the circulation of communications forwarded by the Director of the NGOHS through the Dean or College Secretary of the academic unit. Such communications may involve policies and guidelines for new application and admission as well as criteria for retention and graduation. The College GPC is likewise responsible for dissemination of information on fellowships, assistantships, and other information of interest to the graduate faculty in his/her department. In turn, the GPC endorses recommendations and proposals on relevant matters on graduate studies from the graduate faculty to the NGOHS Director through channels (i.e. through the Dean or College Secretary of the academic unit).
Section 3. Graduate Admissions Committee
Each academic department offering a graduate program shall have a Graduate Admissions Committee (GAC) comprised of at least three (3) regular graduate faculty members with the department/academic GPC Chair serving as ex-ofﬁcio Chair. The department chair shall recommend members to the GAC, as endorsed by the College GPC and the Dean of the academic unit, and approved by the NGOHS Director.
Section 4. Evaluation Of Applicants For Admission Or Graduation
The GAC shall evaluate the academic credentials of applicants and recommend their admission to and graduation from a particular graduate program. The AGPC and GPC shall endorse the recommendation to the NGOHS Director through channels (i.e. through the Dean or College Secretary of the academic unit).

CHAPTER THREE	3
ACADEMIC RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR ALL
GRADUATE PROGRAMS	
Section 1. Student Category
The University Code provides for the following classiﬁcation of students:
A regular student is one who has been formally accepted to a graduate program and is registered for academic credits towards a master's or doctoral degree. They may either be a part-time or a full-time student. A part-time student carries less than the full load called for in a given semester whereas a full-time student is enrolled in all units required per semester.
A non-regular student can be any of the following:
A non-degree student whose academic background qualiﬁes for admission but still needs to meet certain criteria as determined by an admission committee and, therefore, placed on a probationary status. Such student must not be currently enrolled in any other institution of higher learning and not allowed to enroll for credit in more than nine (9) academic units per semester. This excludes the bridging courses or proﬁciency courses required by the speciﬁc degree programs. The non-degree status shall not exceed one (1) academic year. The grades obtained by a non-degree student can be credited. Furthermore, the probationary status can be changed to regular student once all the criteria have been met. In case the student decides to pursue a regular degree course, he/she should ﬁle new application at the NGOHS;
A cross-registrant/cross-enrollee is a student of another institution of higher learning who is allowed to enroll for credit in the University, subject to the provisions of Article 161 (UP System Code 2006) which states that, “No student enrolled in another educational institution shall be allowed to cross-enroll in the University without the approval of the department and the Dean of the DGU” in which enrollment is sought. A written permit for cross-enrollment from the institution in which the applicant is primarily enrolled shall be required and shall indicate the number of units enrolled therein and the subject authorized to be taken in the University of the Philippines.”; and
A special student is allowed to enroll but without credit. This type of student need not satisfy the admission requirements for regular students. However, the applicant must show proof of basic documents such as Ofﬁcial Transcript of Records or diploma. Enrollment as a special student shall be subject to the approval of the NGOHS Director upon the recommendation of the DGU or the college, and shall not exceed one (1) academic year and six (6) units per semester. Special students do not earn formal academic credit. However, subject/s taken, even though without credit, may be reported at the end of each semester as “satisfactory” or “unsatisfactory”. Special students pay the same fees as regular students.

Section 2. Graduate Class And Credit Load Multipliers
Article 1. A graduate class must have at least ﬁve (5) students (Memo No. 92-40, 21 July 1992; UP System Code 2006). Present University rules require that any exceptions to this rule must have Special Approval by the Chancellor on or before the last day of registration.
Article 2. Exemptions to the rule above are based on the UP System Code, Art. 136 and granted under the following conditions (a) when the course is a major or a specialization, and (b) when there is a graduating student in the class. These conditions must have justiﬁcation by the Dean. If the offering of a graduate course with less than ﬁve (5) students cannot be postponed or avoided, there shall be no multiplier for credit load nor overload honoraria to be applied. There shall be no exception to this rule.
Article 3. Credit load multiplier for graduate courses shall be 1.50 times if class size is ten (10) or more and 1.25 times if size is between ﬁve (5) and nine (9).
Article 4. In all of these cases, it is understood that only ofﬁcially registered graduate students who have fully paid as of the last day of late registration, shall be counted. Auditors or sit-ins shall not be counted.
Article 5. Thesis/dissertation advising shall not be given any teaching load credits but shall be given honorarium in accordance with University rules and regulations.
Article 6. A faculty member who combines, merges, or meets two or more sections as one class shall be credited for teaching one section only.
Section 3. Advanced Or Transfer Credits
Article 1. After students have duly matriculated, they may apply for advanced or transfer credits in the following cases:
Courses taken from another institution within or outside the UP System
Students may apply for advanced or transfer credits upon presentation of credentials attesting that they passed the courses which are equivalent to those given in UP Manila in terms of curricular content and credit units and, provided further, that these courses have been taken within the immediate past ﬁve (5) years prior to admission to their present program. Furthermore, these units should not have been credited to a degree previously obtained by the student.
No more than nine (9) units of course work can be credited.
Students may also apply for credits upon passing the validation exam for courses taken from institutions outside UP as required by the department concerned.
Students with non-degree status, have been admitted to a graduate program
Credits of no more than nine (9) units could be transferred, provided the courses have been taken within the immediate past ﬁve (5) years.

A second master's degree
Course requirements that are common between a ﬁrst and second master's degree shall be credited, provided the courses were taken within the last ﬁve (5) years and provided further that the transfer credits shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total number of required units. In addition, the student must earn at least eighteen
(18) graduate units of course credits for the second master's degree.
A student may be granted no more than 9 units of advanced/transfer credits for course work towards the second master's degree.
Courses within the allowed nine (9) units of transfer credits that have already been credited towards completion of a previous degree will only be reﬂected as “Passing” in the Transcript of Records (TOR) and therefore, will no longer be used again in the computation of the GWA for the second degree. This is to avoid using the same grade for the course twice.
Students applying for credit for courses taken outside UP may be required to pass a validation exam depending on the department concerned.
The same rules shall apply for crediting courses from diploma to master’s degree.
Transfer of credits to PhD from another program
Subject to the recommendation of the AGPC and the approval of the Dean of the College, graduate courses taken by a student under another program or allied disciplines of the University of the Philippines may be transferred to his or her PhD course requirements, provided that these courses were taken within the last ﬁve (5) years before the student's admission or transfer to the PhD program.
Shifting from one program to another
All the courses taken can be credited if they were taken within the last ﬁve (5) years
Previously disqualiﬁed student re-admitted to another graduate program
Credits of no more than nine (9) units can be transferred provided the courses have been taken within the immediate past ﬁve (5) years.
Article 2. Request for Validation of Courses (Advanced/ Transfer Credits) (UPM-NGOHS Form #10) shall be ﬁled by the student and approved by the Academic Graduate Program Committee (AGPC) during the ﬁrst semester of residence. The approved advanced or transfer credits shall be endorsed to the NGOHS Director. The NGOHS shall ofﬁcially notify the University Registrar about the accreditation.
Proof of having taken the subjects being applied for advanced credits must be properly documented in the Transcript of Records submitted to the NGOHS.
For credited courses taken from another institution with a different grading nomenclature, the grade shall only be “P” (Passing) as shown in the Transcript of Records; therefore, the units and the grade should not be included in the computation of GWA. However, if the

former institution can provide a corresponding numerical grade similar to UP, then such grade will be reﬂected in the TOR and will be used for the computation of the GWA.
Section 4. Requirements For Shifting/transferring
Article 1. A student who wishes to shift or transfer to another program must write a letter addressed to the NGOHS Director, through proper channels (i.e. College Secretary), stating the reason(s) for the shift/transfer. Attached to the letter is a true copy of grades (i.e., of courses taken in the previous program) secured from the Ofﬁce of the College Secretary.
Article 2. The Program Adviser and/or Academic Graduate Program Committee Chair (AGPCC) should annotate the letter.
Article 3. Student shall get application forms (UPM-NGOHS Form A1-A3) from the NGOHS and shall pay a corresponding fee at the Cashier's Ofﬁce.
Article 4. The NGOHS shall make an initial screening of the student's residency and academic status. The letter, the application form, and the true copy of grades with the notation from the NGOHS, are forwarded to the appropriate AGPC that will approve/disapprove the application based on the admission criteria of the graduate program.
Article 5. The AGPC shall communicate in writing the result of the application for transfer to the NGOHS through same channels.
Article 6. The change in program is recorded in the student's record ﬁled at the NGOHS. The NGOHS shall inform the University Registrar in writing of this change for record purposes.
Section 5. Application
Article 1. Admission into a Master's or PhD program shall require:
A bachelor's degree (e.g. BS, DMD, DVM), or relevant master's degree (e.g. MS, MA) with good academic records from a recognized institution of higher learning. Individual DGUs may specify what degrees qualify as relevant;
While the grade requirement for application is no longer speciﬁed, the Graduate Admissions Committee of the College may still use the GWA, along with other requirements, for screening applications;
Passing an interview and/or written examination that may be required by the Graduate Admissions Committee (GAC) to gauge intellectual capacity and aptitude of applicants for advanced studies;
A duly accomplished Application Form to be submitted to the NGOHS together with the following documents:
Certiﬁed true copy of College Diploma (highest degree obtained) with the seal of the university and the signature of the Registrar in ink;
Photocopy of birth certiﬁcate (original shall be presented for veriﬁcation) ;

Photocopy of marriage certiﬁcate for female married applicants (original shall be presented for veriﬁcation) especially when documents reﬂect names when still on single status;
Four (4) passport size photos;
Two (2) accomplished recommendation forms (UPM-NGOHS Form A3) from referees such as former professors, supervisors or colleagues sent directly to the NGOHS by the referees. Depending on the DGU, a narrative recommendation letter may be required as attachment to this form in support to the ratings provided by the evaluator;
Ofﬁcial receipt of the application/processing fee paid at the UP Manila Cash Division;
Health and dental clearance from the University Health Service;
Additional requirements for foreign applicants:
Certiﬁed true copy of the English translation of the diploma, with the seal of the university and the signature of the Registrar in ink;
Valid TOEFL certiﬁcate with a minimum score of 550 (paper-based); 173 (computer- based); 70 (internet- based) or other Certiﬁcation of English proﬁciency equivalent to the TOEFL requirement (e.g. IELTS band 6); a certiﬁcate that English is the medium of instruction in the university where the student graduated from is sufﬁcient to waive this requirement;
Afﬁdavit of support or certiﬁcate of ﬁnancial capability;
Photocopy of passport (original to be presented for veriﬁcation); and
Alien certiﬁcate of residence for resident aliens.
The NGOHS shall accept and perform the initial screening of the submitted documents prior to forwarding to the DGUs.
Article 2. A foreigner with a tourist visa (9-4) shall not be allowed to enroll in the University. The Philippine Government issues a student visa to foreigners if they can present a certiﬁcation of acceptance from any Philippine institution of learning and have submitted all other relevant requirements. [From the Ofﬁce of Student Affairs (OSA): Applicants with tourist visa are not allowed to study. However, they can apply for conversion of their tourist visa to student visa at the Bureau of Immigration once admitted.]
Article 3. A foreign student's study permit is needed to register for course work. Upon submission of requirements, the International Student Program of the Ofﬁce of Student Affairs (OSA) shall process and issue a temporary student permit. Only the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) shall issue the ﬁnal or validated study permit.

Section 6. Admission
The NGOHS shall set forth the minimum program requirements applicable to all master's and doctoral degree applicants.
Article 1. All application documents must be with the NGOHS by the last working day of May of each year for First Semester applications and last working day of October each year for Second Semester applications.
Article 2. The NGOHS shall accept applications all year round. However, applications received after the deadline shall be considered for the next semester.
Article 3. For applicants who need their documents evaluated earlier (e.g., applying for scholarship, foreign applicants, etc.), they should write and ﬁle a letter of request for early evaluation to the NGOHS not later than three (3) months prior to the deadline of submission of application requirements for the semester/term in which the applicant wishes to enter.
Article 4. The Graduate Program Coordinator (GPC) may request an extension of the deadline for submission of applications for graduate programs under its jurisdiction by writing a letter of request to the NGOHS two (2) weeks before the aforementioned deadlines.
Article 5. The Department/Academic Graduate Program Committee concerned shall determine the acceptability of an applicant based on a speciﬁc set of criteria.
Article 6. Departments or DGUs may set additional requirements or criteria for admission into their Master's and PhD degrees, which may be more stringent than the existing rules of the NGOHS. In no case shall departments or DGUs have requirements or criteria for admission that are less stringent than the existing rules of the NGOHS.
Article 7. No one shall be denied admission to the University by reason of age, gender, nationality, religious belief, economic status, or political afﬁliations.
Article 8. The Department Chair/Graduate Program Committee shall recommend the admission of prospective master's/doctoral students to the Dean of the academic unit who shall endorse the same to the NGOHS Director.
Article 9. The results of screening and evaluation of applicant's documents should be available and reported to the NGOHS not later than a month before the registration period.
Article 10. The NGOHS Director shall issue an ofﬁcial Letter of Acceptance to successful applicants. The schedule of registration, student orientation, and start of classes are included in the admission letter. Moreover, the following documents/forms are attached: Flowchart for Registration, Program of Study (UPM-NGOHS Form # 07), and Deferment Form (UPM - NGOHS Form #9).

Section 7. Deferment of Admission
Article 1. Successful applicants shall be granted admission for a speciﬁc semester/term. Should an applicant be unable to begin studies during the term applied for, a request for deferment of admission (UPM-NGOHS Form # 09) to a later term can be made. Such request shall be made not later than two (2) weeks after the start of the term for which admission has been granted. When granted, such deferment is valid for a maximum of one (1) academic year.
Article 2. Applicants who have previously deferred their admission and decide to begin their studies in the program they have been admitted to should write the University through the NGOHS at least two (2) months before the beginning of the term in which they wish to enter. Also, applicants should note that there are speciﬁc programs that do not have annual admission. Failure to do so will mean having to re-apply for admission.
Section 8. Registration
Article 1. A full-time student may enroll in a minimum of nine (9) units or a maximum of twelve
(12) units of course work per semester and not more than six (6) units during the short term (previously the summer term). A part-time student can enroll in a maximum of eight (8) units per semester, and not more than six (6) units also during the mid-year term.
Article 2. The student shall be considered ofﬁcially registered only upon payment of fees.
Section 9. Dropping Of Subjects
Article 1. A student may, with the consent of the concerned faculty and the Dean, drop a course by ﬁlling out the prescribed UP Form 26 before three-fourths (¾) of the hours prescribed for the semester or mid-year term have elapsed, and not later.
Article 2. Any student who drops a course without the approval of the Dean shall have their registration privileges curtailed or entirely withdrawn.
Article 3. If a subject is dropped after the middle of a semester or mid-year term, the faculty member concerned shall indicate at the time of dropping the date and the class standing of the student as either “Passing” or “Failing” solely for administrative guidance [Art. 350, 669th EC meeting, Sept. 3, 1975].
Article 4. Any college may enact special rules on dropping of courses that would meet their particular needs; provided that said rules do not have the effect of relaxing the preceding general regulations [Art. 352, University Code, 1961].
Article 5. A fee is charged to a student who drops a course.
Section 10. Leave of Absence
Article 1. A student may go on leave for an extended period of time provided the Dean of the academic unit, through channels, approves a written request. The approved request is endorsed to the NGOHS Director. The petition must state the reason/s for which the leave is requested. The

approved leave must not exceed two (2) years. An extended leave period beyond the maximum of two (2) years nulliﬁes the registration of the student to the program. Thus, re-application is needed if the student wants to continue the program.
For a leave of absence (LOA) to be availed of during the second half of a semester, concerned faculty members shall be required to indicate the class standing of the student (passing or failing) at the time of application of the leave. No application for leave of absence shall be approved without the class standing being indicated by the faculty concerned. This should not be entered on the Ofﬁcial Report of Grades [Approved at the 822nd BOR meeting, July 31, 1972].
If a student withdraws after three-fourths (¾) of the total number of hours prescribed for the course has already elapsed, the concerned faculty may submit grades of 5.0 if the class standing of the student up to the time of withdrawal is below 3.0.
No LOA shall be granted within two weeks before the last day of classes.
A fee is charged to a student who goes on ofﬁcial leave of absence.
Article 2. A student can apply for readmission after having been on absence without leave (AWOL) for one semester. A student who goes on AWOL for two consecutive semesters will be disqualiﬁed from the program [See Sec. 11. Art. 1.5].
Section 11. Disqualiﬁcation
Article 1. A student shall be automatically dropped from the graduate program in any of the following cases:
A grade of 5.0 in any course;
Failure to obtain, after completion of the course requirements, a GWA of 2.00 for master's students and a GWA of 1.75 for PhD students;
Failure in the second take of the comprehensive examination;
Failure in the second take of the ﬁnal oral defense of the Master's thesis or PhD dissertation; and/or
Failure to register in two consecutive semesters without an ofﬁcial leave of absence.
Article 2. A disqualiﬁed student can still be re-admitted into other graduate programs within the College. However, he/she will be considered a new applicant and must satisfy the admission criteria for the new program applied for. A stricter policy for readmission of previously disqualiﬁed students may be imposed depending on the College concerned. [For transfer of credit units, see Chapter 3. Sec. 3. Art 1.6.1]
Article 3. A disqualiﬁed student may re-apply to another graduate program within UP Manila only once.

Section 12. Honorable Dismissal
Article 1. A student shall be given an honorable dismissal provided a written petition stating the reason for such is made with a favorable recommendation from the Dean of the academic unit and sent through channels to the NGOHS.
Article 2. Honorable dismissal is voluntary withdrawal from the University with the consent of the academic unit and the NGOHS.
Article 3. All indebtedness to the University (ﬁnancial or property accountability) must be settled before a statement of honorable dismissal can be issued.
Section 13. Residence Requirement And Time Limit
Article 1. Students must be ofﬁcially enrolled for at least one (1) academic year prior to the conferment of a PhD or master's degree. Students are in residence when they are registered for course work in the campus or are at work in absentia, with prior approval by the particular Department/Academic Graduate Program Committee.
Article 2. A maximum residency of seven (7), ﬁve (5), and two (2) calendar years, including leave of absence (LOA) from the start of the graduate work, i.e., upon admission to the program, shall be allowed for the fulﬁllment of all requirements for the PhD degree, master's degree, and diploma/certiﬁcate program, respectively.
Article 3. The regular period of completion of a graduate student transferring from another program shall be reduced in accordance with the time of admission to the original program.
Article 4. A student may request an extension of residency in case the maximum residence rule (MRR) is exceeded. The UPM-NGOHS Form # 08 shall be ﬁlled-out for this purpose and submitted on or before the following deadlines: second Friday of June for the ﬁrst semester; second Friday of November for the second semester; and second Friday of April for the mid-year term.
An extension of no more than two (2) semesters upon recommendation of the adviser through channels shall be granted at a time, but in no case shall total more than ﬁve (5) years. Students on MRR extension shall be required to complete additional units of graduate course/s in their discipline during the extension period at the rate of three (3) units of enrichment course for every two years of extension or a fraction thereof.
A Progress Report after one (1) semester shall be submitted to the NGOHS through proper channels.
All requests for extension should be submitted to the NGOHS at least one month prior to the enrollment or registration period.
Once approved, the date of extension period must be noted. Students on MRR who have not ﬁnished the requirements within the allotted extension period shall not be allowed to enroll in the succeeding term unless another MRR request is approved.
The ﬂowchart of steps for MRR extension is shown on the next page.

